---
title: "117"
volume: "Volume 17: 1923 - 1929, Letters from S.M. Bruce to R.G. Casey"
doc_id: 7248
vol_id: 17
date: 1928-03-15
---

# 117

15th March, 1928

PERSONAL AND CONFIDENTIAL

My dear P.M.,

My other letters by this mail are as under:-

IRISH FREE STATE A statement of the position as it is today between His Majesty's Government and the Irish Free State, with emphasis on the important outstanding question of Naval Defence.

COMMUNIST ACTIVITIES SUBVERSIVE CHARACTERS The usual letters. I have been going into the question of the several overlapping lines of communication between London and Canberra on such subjects and will submit a recommendation for a single channel after further investigation. The present system is administratively bad.

SIMON [1] Enclosing five documents of this series of questionable authenticity.

THE BALKANS Statement of the present position.

RECORDS SYSTEM, FOREIGN OFFICE AND H.M. MISSIONS ABROAD Statements of administrative methods.

CABINET AND C.I.D. RECORDS Statements of administrative methods.

NETHERLANDS PAST INDIES-AIR SERVICES Statement.

LIAISON WITH THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE WESTERN PACIFIC Proposed arrangements for exchange of information with Australia.

DEFENCE OF INDIA Enclosing copy of personal letter from Sir William Birdwood. [2]

AMERICAN CAPITAL IN GREAT BRITAIN U.S. capital in British electrical distributing industry.

CANADIAN-MEXICAN DISPUTE Aide Memoire covering the history of the case to date. [3]

AFGHANISTAN Covering C.I.D. document on relations with Afghanistan, and Cabinet conclusion as to the attitude to be taken in conversations with Amanulla.

FRANCO-AMERICAN PACT [4] AND ANGLO-AMERICAN ARBITRATION TREATY [5] Covering advance copy of Memorandum.

GENERAL LETTER Covering numerous papers.

I am, Yours sincerely, R.G. CASEY 

_ 1 In correspondence between Casey and Bruce the codeword SIMON was used to identify security intelligence passed between the British and Australian Governments.

2 Field Marshal Sir William Birdwood, Commander-in-Chief of the Army in India, had commanded the Australian and New Zealand forces, at Gallipoli.

3 See Letters 90 and 93.

4 See note 35 to Letter 93 and note 13 to Letter 126.

5 See note 36 to Letter 93.

_

__
