---
title: "373 LETTER, HOLT TO TURNER"
volume: "Volume 27: Australia and the United Kingdom, 1960–1975"
doc_id: 10239
vol_id: 27
doc_date: 1967-10-04
---

# 373 LETTER, HOLT TO TURNER

NAA:A1209, 1971/9449PART 1 

Canberra, 4 October 1967

Following our recent discussion about the administration of Australia House, I would like to let you have a considered comment and, at the same time, to pick up the points you raised in your speech on the adjournment last year.

I recognise that there are grounds for taking a view which sees the present arrangements as something historical and traditional and therefore open to review and amendment. Certainly there is a long history on the present situation but the arrangement is also a response to need. It may be argued that our relationship with Britain, having matured into a partnership of equals, no longer requires the special attention of Prime Ministers. The fact, however, is that in its maturing, a deep range of government and cultural interests have been served by this special contact. On the government side Australia has relations in practically every direction with the United Kingdom with the result that practically every Australian Department is represented there. There is a major Trade Section; a major Treasury Section; a major Defence Section, together with Supply and Procurement; Immigration is significant, Customs arrangements important and practically every sphere of Commonwealth action has a representative. This testifies to the enormous interchange of experience and information going on at all levels between Australia and Britain. Culturally, the relationship is significant and most of our important national institutions owe something to the inspiration of a close kinship. On the more formal side, Australia recognises a special constitutional relationship which is expressed through The Queen and this has sustained the deepening relationships. An illustration of the scope of our relationship with Britain is that every Australian State has a separate Mission there. No other Commonwealth country is so represented.

In this context, diplomatic exchange is to be seen as one area—a very important area—of a whole network of relationships. Diplomacy is concerned with the execution of a Government’s external policy and the special inter—relationships with the external policies of other governments. But our relationship with Britain, as I have indicated, are [sic] so all-embracing, extending as they do through family relationships, culture, religion, tradition and government, that I think a special institutional arrangement for the government’s part in the process is warranted. For instance, we follow closely trade and monetary policies, tax structure, defence, scientific and educational policies. The main administrative innovations in government, both local and national, are of importance to us because there is so much counterpart in Australia of the principles of British administrative activity. There is hardly the same need for emphasising the formal processes of diplomacy as there is in our relationship with other countries. I recognise that these things can change and that there is always the risk that we will be left with the form but not the substance of a special relationship. However, where new factors enter into the picture I would regard it as a matter of importance to study their effect. I do not propose to take a special long term attitude in this matter; I regard practice and experience as most important, as a theoretical position, either long term or short, offers an insufficient guide to future policy on this matter.

Perhaps I should, by way of conclusion, comment to you on the basic reason for the organisational arrangements that we have. The post of High Commissioner is held by a former member of the Ministry. The basic concept here is to ensure that there is a full contact and exchange at the political level between Australia and Britain. The post of Deputy High Commissioner is always a very high senior civil servant and he has combined with his functions the general task of administration together with major representational functions which will devolve upon him. Next in rank, and charged especially with matters of external policy, comes the External Affairs representative who is given unfettered access to the diplomatic community and to the Commonwealth and Foreign Office. He reports directly to the Minister and Department of External Affairs as necessary. The administration of Australia House is under the Official Secretary and an officer is chosen for this job for his experience in co-ordinating the administrative processes. I might mention that the post of Deputy High Commissioner has always been filled by distinguished officers of the Australian Public Service, and the government has considered it an advantage that our Deputy High Commissioners have the status of permanent head because of the status which accrues to the Mission from an appointment of such standing. The first Deputy High Commissioner, Sir Edwin McCarthy and his successor Sir Allen Brown, on the completion of their terms, have taken other diplomatic posts abroad. The present Deputy High Commissioner, Mr John Knott, is a former permanent head of the Department of Supply.

As to the future, as I have indicated, I keep an open mind to developments. I consider that the present arrangements adequately take into account both the broad range of interests Australia has in Britain and the special interests of Australia’s external policy. In selecting Australia’s representatives a balance will continue to be struck in the selection of people for senior posts with representational and administrative skill and you may be assured that I shall continue to give the administration of Australia House my personal attention.
