---
title: "207 MIS No. 6/68"
volume: "Volume 26: Australia and Papua New Guinea, 1966–1969"
doc_id: 9715
vol_id: 26
doc_date: 1968-07-05
barcode: 546822
---

# 207 MIS No. 6/68

Port Moresby, 5 July 1968

Secret

[_matter omitted_]

_Item 421: Internal security—indigenous brawling in Port Moresby_

Brawls which began at the BOROKO football ground, at the conclusion of a Papua versus New Guinea representative match on the afternoon of Sunday 9th June, 1968, spread to various parts of the town. The fighting was between Papuans and New Guineans, predominantly Highlanders and coastal people until brought under control by police action some four hours later.

On 10th June, 1968, minor incidents at the Agricultural Show in PORT MORESBY sparked off further disturbances. As on the previous day, brawling quickly became wide-spread involving both small and large groups at various scattered areas of Port Moresby. The disturbances were quelled by about 7 p.m., some five hours after the initial incident at the show grounds.

Although these disturbances resulted in the arrest of 133 persons and caused considerable tension among the indigenous population in and around Port Moresby, press reports tended to be coloured and exaggerated.

During the brawling on both days, no weapons other than sticks and stones were used; no persons were seriously injured; no attempt was made to attack any member of the Police Force; nor were any Europeans or Asians involved. Police resources were adequate to control the brawls with a number of police still held in reserve. During the following week, rumours of a ‘payback’ by the Papuans, as well as unfounded stories of deaths and continuing clashes, maintained tension. However, there were no further incidents.

Similar disturbances which are a manifestation of the rivalry between Papuans and New Guineans in general, and of the resentment held by Highlanders towards coastal dwellers in particular, could occur in the future with little or no warning. Little excuse is required to kindle disturbances of this nature.

_Item 422: political development—Pangu Pati_

(i) The present known Parliamentary membership of PANGU PATI is 9, having been reduced from the original twelve elected members by the election of John GUISE as the Speaker, Siwi KURONDO accepting Ministerial appointment and Ebia OLEWALE resigning at the direction of his constituents. It is believed that PANGU PATI officials are themselves unsure whom their true supporters are.  
It is reliably reported that PANGU PATI is having financial difficulties; the Secretary, Albert MAORI-KIKI, is not being paid. Parliamentary members of PANGU have agreed to subscribe $20 per month to party funds from their parliamentary salaries to assist in overcoming these difficulties.

(ii)A prominent TOLAI, Thomas TOBUNBUN, who is also President of the RABAUL Workers’ Association, has written to the Executive Committee of PANGU PATI, requesting assistance in the formation of a Branch of the Party at RABAUL.

[_matter omitted_]

_Item 423: political development_

At the first meeting of the new House of Assembly there were indications of mounting feeling against PANGU PATI. Primarily, the feeling appears to have been a reaction against the over-sophisticated and somewhat supercilious manner adopted by some PANGU speakers in the Assembly.

On 14th June, 1968, a meeting of more then 50 members of the House of Assembly, who are not members of PANGU PATI, was organised in PORT MORESBY by John WATTS (M.H.A. for Western Highlands), Jason GARRETT (M.H.A. for Madang) and Noel CASEY (M.H.A. for Kainantu). It is reported that the object of the meeting was to decide on action to be taken in the House which would ‘put PANGU PATI in its place’ and show PANGU that it could not dominate the affairs of the House as it had been trying to do.

Later that day, when the House was in session, coordinated action by this group resulted in the adjournment and eventual withdrawal of a PANGU PATI motion for a Commission of Enquiry into the electoral system. Official Members had indicated that they would support the principle of the motion.

This tends to corroborate earlier information from sources considered fairly reliable that John WATTS, M.H.A., is proposing the formation of a ‘Conservative Bloc’ to oppose radical issues which PANGU PATI may raise in the House.

It is not known if the show of strength on the part of independent members represents a temporary marriage of convenience or the organisation of a permanent ‘conservative’ bloc.

[_matter omitted_]

[ [NAA: A1838, 936/3/15 part 4](http://www.naa.gov.au/cgi-bin/Search?O=I&Number=546822) ]
