---
title: "85"
volume: "Volume 18: 1923 - 1929, Letters from S.M. Bruce to McDougall"
doc_id: 7430
vol_id: 18
doc_date: 1926-12-30
---

# 85

30th December, 1926

PERSONAL

My dear Prime Minister,

I hope your trip across the Atlantic was not too unpleasantly cold. The tape gives your first American speech in which you are reported as giving the Continent of Europe rather a dark character.

I have completed a summary of the series of discussions with traders, London Agencies, and with Cooper [1] and Gough [2], and I enclose the draft.

I have had long talks with Alexander [3] (Lab.) and Col. Angus McDonnell [4] of the Parliamentary delegation.5 The former is a dyed in the wool Free Trader, and the latter a mild Protectionist.

They both seemed equally impressed by the borrowing policy of the State Governments and with the extreme policy of High Protection.

I am accompanying Gepp6 when he meets the Delegation on January 6th, and I hope there will be a frank and useful discussion.

I hope you will realise that I really meant what I said on your last evening. I enjoy doing a job of work for you very much. I feel that our labours on educating people here on Empire economics will bear fruit, and I shall look forward to further progress on the economic side during the next three years, and a really successful Imperial Conference in 1929, when I hope you will again be over.

Yours sincerely, F. L. MCDOUGALL 

_ 1 Sir James Cooper, company director; Chairman of the London Agencies of the Commonwealth Dried Fruits and Dairy Produce Control Boards.

2 A. E. Gough, General Manager of the Overseas Farmers Co- operative Federation, Ltd; member of the London Agency of the Dried Fruits Control Board. The discussions probably concerned the possibility of reducing the number of agents importing Australian fruit.

3 A. V. Alexander, Parliamentary Secretary to the Board of Trade 1924.

4 Conservative M.P.

5 The Empire Parliamentary Association Delegation which toured Australia in the latter part of 1926.

6 H. W. Gepp, Chairman of the Commonwealth Development and Migration Commission.

_

__
